NARRATOR: We are inseparable.
We're best friends.
MAN: Anywhere you find humans
you will almost
certainly find dogs.
NARRATOR: And they are smarter
than we ever imagined.
Astonishing new
research is revealing
that dogs are far more than
merely tamed wild animals.
MAN: What makes our
relationships so special
is the dog's ability
to be able to read our
emotions so effectively.
NARRATOR: Have they evolved
a new kind of intelligence?
WOMAN: Suddenly
there were dogs doing
something that not
even chimps could do.
NARRATOR: Have
dogs developed a language to
communicate complex emotions?
MAN: Anger, fear,
happiness, despair.
MAN: You can almost understand
what they're thinking.
NARRATOR: Why do we love
an animal that was once
a fearsome predator?
How did dogs go from this...
to this?
Is it in the genes or
the way we treat them?
And when did it all begin?
The bones tell one story...
We start seeing the
first things 1 2,000
or 13,000 years ago.
NARRATOR: The
genes tell another.
100,000 years or more.
NARRATOR: The answer is more
important than you might think.
MAN: Without dog
domestication,
civilization just would
not have been possible.
NARRATOR: ''Dogs Decoded,''
right now on NoVA.
Major funding for NoVA is
provided by the following...
ExxonMobil, taking on
the world's toughest
energy challenges.
And by:
And...
And by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Corrie, come here.
NARRATOR: There are more pet
dogs than babies in the world--
nearly half a billion.
Good boy. Sit.
Come on.
NARRATOR: We treat them as if
they are fellow human beings
with all the
thoughts, feelings
and emotions of a family member.
Good girl.
NARRATOR: It's an incredibly
close relationship.
We share our lives, our homes,
even our beds with them.
We're very close;
we're best friends.
Pippin sleeps with us.
He loves being in the bed
with his head on the pillow.
He just seems to fit in.
She's there with my slippers
first thing in the morning.
She's part of the family,
she is the family.
NARRATOR: For decades,
science has dismissed dogs
as being unworthy
of legitimate study.
But all that has changed.
Scientists are now
attempting to understand dogs
like never before.
What kind of bond do we
really have with our dogs?
Can we read each
other's emotions?
Are they smarter than we think?
And how and when did this
unique relationship develop?
Dogs are all over the
world, they're everywhere.
Anywhere you find
humans, you will almost
certainly find dogs.
We're now beginning to realize
that we can answer
certain questions in dogs
that we can't really answer
in any other species.
JULIANE KAMINSKI: There's been
this explosion in dog research,
I think really because they are
specially tuned into humans
and this makes dogs extremely
interesting as a model.
NARRATOR: Here at England's
University of Lincoln,
Professor Daniel
Mills specializes
in veterinary
behavioral medicine.
He's using eye
tracking technology
to probe how close our
relationship really is.
MILLS: What we're
trying to do here
is see the world from
a dog's perspective
rather than just
impose our own views
as to how we think the
dog sees the world.
NARRATOR: He's
attempting to discover
if dogs are as good at
reading our emotions
as their owners claim.
WOMAN: He'll know
what I'm thinking
even before it's turned
into a thought bubble.
WOMAN: He is clearly an animal.
I accept that he is
totally an animal.
I am not under any
illusions that he isn't,
but he's more knowing than I
would expect an animal to be.
He will look at me
with sorrowful eyes
and then give me one
big lick on the hand
as if to say,
''It's all right.''
It's this sixth
sense that dogs have.
MILLS: One of the things that
a lot of people comment on
is that dogs seem to be
naturally attuned to them
and be able to sense
their moods and whatever,
and part of our work here
is actually to look into the
scientific basis of that.
NARRATOR: The key to a dog's
ability to read our emotions
might lie in something we
all do without knowing it.
MILLS: When we express our
emotions in our faces,
we don't do it symmetrically.
It's been shown that if
you take somebody's face
when they're
expressing some emotion,
like happiness or anger
or something like that,
there is a difference between
the left and right side.
NARRATOR: Composite
faces consisting of two
right or two left sides
look very different.
MILLS: One of the
theories is that
maybe our emotions are
more faithfully presented
in the right side of our face,
and that's the side
that we tune into.
And when we look at a face,
we have what's known as a
natural left gaze bias,
so you naturally look much
more towards the left,
i.e., the right-hand
side of somebody's face.
NARRATOR: Eye-tracking
software demonstrates
that when presented
with a human face,
we nearly always
look left first.
Daniel Mills wants to find out
if dogs use the same trick
to read human faces.
MILLS: Shifting the
direction of your gaze
we thought was fairly
unique to people
until we started
looking at dogs.
(whistles ) Taz, Tazy!
NARRATOR: To test the theory,
his team recreates this
experiment with dogs.
Moose, what's that?
NARRATOR: They present a series
of images showing human faces,
dog faces and inanimate objects
and record the direction of a
dog's gaze with a video camera.
ANAIS RACCA: We
found that dogs,
when they are looking at
pictures of dog faces
or objects,
they will look randomly
on the left or the right.
NARRATOR: But when it
comes to human faces,
they make a
remarkable discovery.
RACCA: So now we have Taz
looking at a human face,
so first she's looking in
the middle of the screen,
and here is the first eye
movements on the left.
She's in the middle and
she's going on the left.
Now this is Moose.
And then we can see really
well that this is a left gaze.
From here to here.
We can see the white here.
She's even moving her head.
NARRATOR: Does this mean dogs
can read human emotions?
As far as we know,
no other animal
has this relationship
with the human face.
And dogs don't do
this with each other.
This suggests that dogs
have acquired a new skill
enabling them to communicate
with us on an emotional level.
Being able to detect
when somebody is angry
or potentially going
to be harmful to them,
you could understand that there
may be a biological advantage
in being able to read
people's emotions
and equally that it makes sense
for a dog to approach somebody
when they're smiling.
If dogs can read
human emotion,
and increasingly the
scientific evidence
is beginning to point
in that direction,
that's going to form the
basis of a very powerful bond
between human and dog.
NARRATOR: Evidence like
this appears to underpin
our conviction that
dogs understand us
in a way other animals cannot.
But for many dog owners,
this unique relationship is much
more than a one-way street.
I like to think we
can understand him.
Yes, but he woofs and we talk.
That's because he wants to
be part of the conversation.
If he's bored, he'll take
a deep sigh and go...
(imitates dog whine)
I think he's got a bark
when he wants to go out.
Ruff!
And I think he's got a bark
when he hears strange noises.
(growls )
Sometimes when he
tells the kittens off
he goes (barks and
growls )... like that.
If you're in a
certain mindset,
you can almost understand
what they're thinking.
NARRATOR: The idea that
we can understand barking
almost like a language
has always been
dismissed by scientists.
But in Hungary, an
experiment is underway
looking for evidence to back up
the claims made by dog owners.
Here in Budapest is one
of the world's first
research facilities dedicated
to the human/dog relationship.
Dr. Adam Miklosi wants to see
if humans really can
understand the barks of dogs.
Today he's out on
a field expedition
collecting recordings.
(barking)
ADAM MIKLOSI: Scientists
used to think that
barking is a random noise
without any specific
information or content.
However, we have
a different idea.
Dogs might tell us something
about their emotions--
anger, fear,
happiness, despair.
So these are basic emotions
which I think humans
might be able to recognize
in the barking sound.
NARRATOR: To test this idea,
Adam and his team act
out a number of scenarios
provoking dogs to bark
in different ways.
When other people listen
to these recordings,
will they be able to match
the bark to the emotion?
Alone bark.
(whimpering)
That sounds like a dog
asking for attention.
(whimpering yelp)
Aww, it's anxious.
It's sad.
Distressed.
(high-pitched yelp)
Want to be let off a chain
or something like that.
(barking)
I think that one's playful.
(barks )
Excitement.
MAN: It seems as though
they're actually asking
their owner for something.
(barking)
It sounds as if it may want a
ball or a toy or something.
She could be playing with it.
(barking)
Angry.
This is a sound
that she would make
if she saw somebody behind
the fence walking along.
(barking)
It's a stranger, I think.
It's a stranger
encroaching on territory.
(barking)
NARRATOR: The results
of Miklosi's research
are remarkable.
It shows a strong
agreement between people
about the meaning
of different barks.
(recording of barking)
MIKLOSI: Overall in
the study you could say
that people can
discriminate six barks
and most of them were
quite successful in this.
NARRATOR: Dr. Miklosi
has created a system
to analyze the barks.
It's helping him decode how
dogs communicate meaning.
MIKLOSI: I measure the three
features of this sound.
One was the frequency, the
other was the tonality
and the third was the interval
between the barking sounds.
And probably this is also what
the judgment of people is based
when they are
describing the bark
in terms of emotional content.
NARRATOR: But what's
more surprising
is not our ability to
interpret the barks,
but what the barks
reveal about dogs.
In the natural world, dogs'
wild relatives, wolves,
only bark as a warning.
Amazingly, during the
course of domestication,
dogs may have evolved their
elaborate vocal repertoire
especially to
communicate with us.
MIKLOSI: At the basic
level, everyone can do it
and there is a good
chance that barking
is a very good means to
communicate with humans.
NARRATOR: The evidence from
these recent experiments
seems to confirm what dog
owners have asserted all along:
that dogs and people are
incredibly attuned to each other
in a way that no
other two species are.
And new research techniques now
allow us to study more precisely
the nature of this bond.
Some scientists believe
that our interaction
has a biochemical signature
that may be similar
to what happens between
a mother and a baby.
It's really hard to describe.
It's just an amazing feeling.
NARRATOR: In Sweden, Professor
Kerstin Uvnas-Moberg
has been studying the role
of the hormone oxytocin
in creating the bond between
mothers and their newborns.
UVNAS-MOBERG: Oxytocin is a
little, little peptide hormone.
It's just nine amino acids.
It's produced in a very
old part of the brain
called the hypothalamus.
And oxytocin helps the
mother quickly establish
the positive feelings
and the bond to the baby.
NARRATOR: Each time
a mother breastfeeds,
she has a new
release of oxytocin,
which may reinforce the bond.
UVNAS-MOBERG: It's sort of in
a way difficult to understand
how you can be
familiar with somebody
who is actually a stranger
so quickly, don't you think?
Yeah.
NARRATOR: Professor
Uvnas-Moberg believes
oxytocin plays a similar role
in the bond between
dogs and their owners.
To test the theory,
blood samples are taken
from dogs and their owners
before and during
a petting session.
UVNAS-MOBERG: We had
a basal blood sample
and there was nothing, and
then we had the sample taken
at one minute and three minutes
and you could see this
beautiful peak of oxytocin.
The fascinating
thing is, actually,
that the peak of oxytocin
is similar to the one we see
in breastfeeding mothers.
NARRATOR: Surprisingly,
it's not just the owners
who are affected.
Blood samples taken from
dogs reveal a similar burst
of oxytocin.
It is a mutual kind of
interaction, you know.
The owner touches with her hands
and they both smell,
hear and see each other.
That is a very nice way of
triggering oxytocin release
in the two of them.
NARRATOR: Oxytocin has a
powerful physiological effect.
It can lower the heart
rate and blood pressure
and may lead to reduced
levels of stress.
Research indicates that owning a
dog could even extend your life.
UVNAS-MOBERG: If
you have a dog,
you are much less likely
to have a heart attack.
If you have a heart attack,
you are three to four times
more likely to survive it
if you have a dog
than if you don't.
NARRATOR: Our relationship
with dogs goes
back thousands of years.
So, how did it begin?
Where did the first
dog come from?
Darwin recognized our unique
relationship with dogs,
but even he couldn't
say for sure
which animal was the true
ancestor of today's dogs.
It's a complex puzzle that both
archaeologists and geneticists
are working to solve.
There's a huge amount of
variation in present-day dogs.
Consider the difference between
a Pekinese and a Great Dane.
Could they really
all be descended
from one wild ancestor?
GREGER LARSON: It could
have been a coyote
that may have
intergressed with a wolf
and then that may have been
slightly selected upon
to create one
particular breed of dog.
Or jackals or African wild dogs.
Any number of these
other dog-like species
that are out there must
have somehow come together,
and that's where that
variation must have come.
NARRATOR: Until the
advent of genetics,
archaeology had
few firm answers.
LARSON: All you have to
play with are the bones
and so when you
look at the bones,
if you don't have a very small,
flat-faced, round-headed pug
in the archaeological record,
you don't know where
that came from.
Those are questions
that before genetics
you really couldn't answer.
NARRATOR: To unravel the
evolutionary origins of dogs,
geneticists compare
DNA from dogs
with that of their
wild relatives.
Specifically they look at
mitochondrial DNA sequences
which pass unchanged
down the maternal line.
Since mitochondrial DNA
changes little over time,
it can act as a
kind of signature
left by an animal's ancestors.
Those markers in domestic
dogs show them to be
much more closely
related to gray wolves
than they are to
any other species.
There's no admixture,
so we never see a mitochondrial
signature of, say,
an African wild dog or jackal
or coyote in a domestic dog.
Of the thousands upon
thousands of mitochondrial DNA
that's been extracted
from domestic dogs,
every single one of them just
looks just like a gray wolf.
(howling)
NARRATOR: This
controversy is settled.
Dogs are domesticated wolves.
But a mystery remains.
When and how did this
change take place?
What is clearly a dog?
Clearly a dog is something
which is clearly not a wolf.
Well, here's a wolf skull,
and as you can see, it's
a long, quite low skull
with a relatively flat top.
The teeth are quite large and
the thing is quite narrow.
Compare that with
a domestic dog.
This is a cairn terrier.
And as you can see, the
process of domestication
has gone really
quite a long way.
The whole face is
very much shorter;
it's been contracted
towards the brain case.
The brain case itself
has a much steeper front
and a much more
bowed upper surface.
So if you found that,
you'd be in no doubt you were
dealing with a domestic dog.
But this is a
domestic Alsatian,
and telling these apart
really would be
substantially difficult.
NARRATOR: And since early dogs
were probably very wolf-like,
it's hard to pinpoint when
domestication happened
by looking at the
shape of the bones.
ROWLEY-CONWY: The best
I can give you is around
1 2,000 or 13,000 years ago.
We start seeing the first things
that everybody would accept
as being domestic dogs.
NARRATOR: But mitochondrial DNA
offers a different set of clues.
LARSON: The original genetic
dates that were coming out
seemed to suggest that
domestication was happening
on a far earlier timescale
than was suggested
by anything in the
archaeological record.
The first dates that were
coming out were on the order
of a hundred thousand
years or more,
which a lot of archaeologists
raised their eyebrows at.
NARRATOR: It's hotly
debated exactly when
dogs were domesticated,
but geneticists and
archaeologists agree
on one thing: our relationship
with dogs goes back
thousands of years, further
than with any other pet.
It was a time when we were
still hunter-gatherers.
ROWLEY: Dogs were certainly the
first animal to be domesticated
and they fit into hunting
and gathering societies
better than any other
species out there.
LARSON: At this stage, when
we're hunting and gathering
and killing wild animals,
after you finish with them
you're creating a
relatively large pile
of bone and leftover meat,
things that these wolves would
have been very attracted to.
Those wolves that were able to
take advantage of that resource
and were a little
bit less afraid
and could approach
the human camp
were then setting themselves up
into a closer
relationship with humans.
We are carnivores, we
are social carnivores,
we hunt in groups and
we hunt in daylight.
There are not many other
species that do that.
The wolf is a social carnivore
that hunts by daylight.
And therefore I think there's
natural potential for teamwork
between those two species.
LARSON: We became much
better hunters with dogs.
We are more successfully
taking down large game,
which means we have
more food to eat,
which means we can
have more offspring,
which means the overall
populations of humans grow.
NARRATOR: Dog domestication
may have helped pave the way
for a fundamental change
in human lifestyle.
ROWLEY-CONWY: It's hard
to see how early herders
would have moved and protected
and guarded their flocks
without domestic
dogs being in place.
And one has to wonder
whether agriculture would
ever really have made it
as a viable alternative
to hunting and gathering.
NARRATOR: Some believe
that the influence of
dogs on our development
was not just
important but pivotal.
LARSON: Dogs absolutely
turn the tables.
Without dogs, humans would
still be hunter-gatherers.
Without that initial starting
phase of dog domestication,
civilization just would
not have been possible.
NARRATOR: We look at our dogs
and we see an intelligence,
an ability to interact with us
unlike any other
domesticated animal.
But are dogs
really that clever,
or are they just dumb animals
taught to perform tricks
that mimic human behavior?
I think she's very smart.
She learns tricks
fairly quickly.
If I'm packing a suitcase,
they will go and
sit in the suitcase
because they know that suitcase
is going to go somewhere.
When I'm talking to him,
most of the time his little
head usually jilts to the side
as if he knows what I'm saying.
I do talk to her and she picks
up on what I say to her.
I know it sounds stupid,
but I do actually have
a conversation with my dog.
NARRATOR: So how does the
intelligence of a dog
compare in the animal kingdom?
New research is discovering
that in certain ways,
dogs may actually
think more like us
than any other animal,
including our nearest
relative, the chimpanzee.
KAMINSKI: Of all the questions
around the evolution
of human cognition,
of course people would focus
in on chimps quite naturally.
And suddenly there were
dogs doing something
that not even chimps could do.
NARRATOR: Cognitive psychologist
Juliane Kaminski compares chimps
with dogs in a series of
revealing experiments.
At Leipzig Zoo, Kaminski
is testing chimps
to see if they can understand
human gestures, like pointing,
to find a hidden treat.
As simple as it seems to us,
even our nearest
primate relatives
fail the task miserably.
KAMINSKI: She's not
really focusing on me
and she's simply
making her own choice.
Most of the time you can see
that she makes a decision
long before I give my gesture.
She doesn't even wait
for my information.
It's such a cooperative
interaction,
so it's like really I'm
providing information for her
to find food, which is
just simply something
which would never happen
in a chimp group, really.
I mean a chimp wouldn't
go like, ''Oh, look,
there's the banana,''
and then another chimp
could go and get it.
NARRATOR: Since we're
the only species that
makes this gesture,
it would be remarkable if any
animal could understand it.
Good boy.
NARRATOR: But dog owners
take it for granted
that their dogs
respond to pointing.
Good boy!
NARRATOR: For
Kaminski, it's proof
of their extraordinary
social intelligence.
KAMINSKI: If you really
look at that gesture,
it's an informative gesture,
so it's, in its essence, a
very cooperative interaction.
So I'm really helping
you to find something.
And for dogs,
following pointing
seems to be very natural
and it makes dogs
extremely interesting.
NARRATOR: In fact, dogs are so
tuned into our social cues,
they can even pick up
on something as subtle
as the direction of our gaze.
(speaking German )
Humans have unique
almond-shaped eyes
with exposed white sclera
visible on each side.
KAMINSKI: One hypothesis is
that we have evolved those eyes
because we use it
for communication,
so you can...
really with human eyes
you can really tell easily
which direction I'm looking.
NARRATOR: But these aren't
skills dogs use with each other.
They are abilities
dogs only use with us.
KAMINSKI: I think it's
very easy to imagine
that they develop special skills
in interacting with humans
because that's their
new social partner.
So they kind of learn to
interpret human communication,
which is different
from dog communication.
So they kind of learned
a second language.
So you could probably say
they are bilingual, yes.
NARRATOR: Even puppies
as young as six weeks old
seem to respond
to human gestures.
At least some of the time.
KAMINSKI: If they learn it,
they learn it very quickly,
and it's obvious that
they are ready to do it.
So from the very beginning,
they are ready to receive
human communication.
NARRATOR: Dogs are primed
to communicate with us,
but just how smart are they?
New research reveals
their abilities extend
way beyond what anyone thought.
Professor Kaminski
has discovered
a remarkable border
collie living in Austria
just outside Vienna.
She's conducted a
series of experiments
and is amazed at the
dog's intelligence.
She can distinguish
objects by name,
which is really amazing.
And she has, like,
many, many words.
Kase.
Das Zebra.
NARRATOR: With a vocabulary
of over 340 words,
Betsy is pushing the boundaries
of what we think
dogs are capable of.
Karotte.
Sandwich.
NARRATOR: Betsy's owner, who
prefers to remain anonymous,
explains how this all started.
OWNER: I think it was when she
was four or five months old,
when she spontaneously started
to connect human words to items.
When we were discussing
''shall we play with the
rope or with the ball?''
she immediately started
to bring those items,
so it was actually her
idea and from this time on,
we started to really train
her on different words.
It was maybe one toy
per week and it worked.
KAMINSKI: I think on average a
well-trained dog maybe knows
like 15 commands or something.
There are just a very few
individuals who can do
what she does.
I can tell you that I
tried it with my own dog
and it didn't work at all.
So he could maybe
distinguish two objects
after a while and after
extensive training.
But she is really able
to learn this easily.
More than 300 objects--
that's pretty amazing.
NARRATOR: Betsy's
understanding of vocabulary
rivals that of a two-year-old,
so Kaminski wants to
test her comprehension
on other skills as well.
Can you go find me one
of them over there? Yeah?
NARRATOR: Two-year-olds are
just beginning to understand
how to use symbols
such as scale models
to represent something else.
Though it looks easy, it
requires abstract thinking
way beyond the capacity
of almost all animals.
But would Betsy be
able to do this, too?
(giving instructions in German )
Ja...!
(speaking encouragingly
in German )
KAMINSKI: This was something the
owners had never tried before
so when I came and I said,
''I want to do this,''
they were really, like,
''Oh, no way, that's
not going to work.''
I was the first one
doing that with her
and she had no problem doing
it right from the beginning.
This is surprising
because in its essence,
if I hold out an object,
she turns it into
something communicative
and that's so interesting.
NARRATOR: Children
also begin to grasp
that a drawing or photograph
can depict a real object.
Thank you very
much, well done.
KAMINSKI: In its
essence, the picture is
something very
different as the object
so it's a... it's a
piece of paper, but...
and it's two-dimensional but
it's representing something,
so she obviously interprets
that as representing an object,
a three-dimensional object,
and that's so interesting
that she does this.
''I know exactly what you want.
This is the one you
want and I'm going to
go and get it for you.''
Ja, gut, super!
Braves Madchen,
gut gemacht, super.
NARRATOR: Kaminski is
unsure how many dogs might
have similar abilities,
but Betsy has shown that certain
dogs may have the potential
to be more intelligent than
we ever thought possible.
So how did dogs acquire
these unique abilities?
Did these evolve over
thousands of years,
or is it rather the way
dogs have been raised
in a human environment?
(howling)
Dogs and wolves are still
the same species today.
They can easily interbreed.
Overall, wolves and dogs are
99.8% genetically identical.
Given that they're
biologically so similar,
is it the way we raise them in
our homes that makes a dog?
Researchers in Hungary set
out to answer this question.
KUBINYI ENIK?: We wanted to see
whether the special relationship
between humans and dogs
are due to nature or nurture.
So we wanted to see what happens
if a wolf is raised in a
human environment, in a home,
whether it would act
like a dog or not.
NARRATOR: A litter
of five-day-old cubs
is taken from a wolf
sanctuary outside Budapest.
Several young researchers
are their adoptive parents,
caring for them 24 hours a day.
As a control
for the experiment, they
already raised puppies.
Now they aim to raise the
wolf cubs in the same way.
So we were especially
nice with our cubs
because we wanted to maintain
a very good
relationship with them.
They were really cute, so
it was not very difficult
to carry them
everywhere we were going
and we also slept
together with the cubs.
So the bonding, it was good.
I mean, I really liked my cubs
and there was a strong, really
strong relationship between us.
NARRATOR: Then
something changed.
Despite raising the cubs in
the same way as the puppies,
at eight weeks, differences
start showing up.
ENIK?: Dog puppies were always
interested in what I was doing.
There is a very strong
cooperative tendency in dogs
and this was missing in wolves.
They had their own ideas.
They were not much
interested in my activities.
NARRATOR: The researchers
want to find out
exactly what is going on
and decide to run a series of
tests comparing the wolf cubs
with puppies of the same age.
(toy yipping)
The puppies engage...
The wolves don't.
Unlike dogs, the wolf cubs
do not respond to pointing.
In fact, they hardly make eye
contact with humans at all.
The cubs behave the same
as they would in the wild.
(cub growling)
ENIK?: She was
really possessive.
If she wanted to
grab an object,
it was really difficult
to get it back,
and if we wanted to
open the refrigerator
and have breakfast,
the pup was immediately in the
middle of the refrigerator
and grabbed something.
It is not like with a dog that
you say, ''No, you shouldn't.''
It just didn't care.
(growling)
NARRATOR: The battles worsened.
ENIK?: After the second month,
we started to have
more and more conflicts
and the wolves wanted
to destroy everything.
And of course when the cub
is a small cub, it's nothing,
but when they reach 40 or
50 kilograms, you know,
it starts to be
really dangerous.
We just could not keep
them in the house anymore.
Hoo!
NARRATOR: After four
months, the cubs had to be
returned to the reserve.
The experiment shows that
upbringing has little impact.
It's impossible to
turn a wolf into a dog,
no matter how much it
is loved and nurtured.
ENIK?: So according
to our experiences,
the dog is not a
socialized wolf at all.
These differences we experienced
in the communicative
ability and in the
social behavior of dogs,
this is the effect
of domestication.
NARRATOR: The
differences must lie
in the way dogs have
been bred by humans
over thousands of years.
Their unique abilities are
now part of their nature.
But how did dogs evolve
these innate attributes?
Can we figure out
what made them tame?
A remarkable experiment in
Siberia may hold the key
to understanding how wolves
evolved into domesticated dogs.
(horn honks )
Half a century ago,
Soviet scientists set
up a breeding program
to see if they could
domesticate silver foxes.
Foxes are closely
related to wolves.
The project, which has
attracted the attention
of scientists
across the world,
is opening a remarkable window
on the process of domestication.
Here on a farm outside
the city of Novosibirsk,
the experiment still
continues today,
overseen by Dr. Lyudmila Trut.
The breeding program
began in 1959
when the first foxes were
selected from local fur farms.
(Trut speaking Russian )
(translated): We approached
the animals in the cages
and recorded their
reaction to us.
We could see
that some of the foxes
showed aggressive behavior.
Others were frightened.
But only one percent of them
showed neither signs of fear
or aggression.
NARRATOR: This one percent
is selected to become
the founding generation
of a new population of foxes.
At every generation, the
selection process is repeated.
Only the tamest foxes
are allowed to breed.
Within just three generations,
the aggressive behavior
begins to disappear.
The radical changes
came through in the
eighth generation,
when foxes started to
seek contact with humans
and show affection to them.
The amazing thing was that cubs
who had just started to crawl
opened their eyes and started
showing affection to humans
by breathing heavily, wagging
their tails and howling.
This kind of response
was a big surprise to us.
NARRATOR: Half a century and
nearly 50 generations later,
the foxes are tamer than ever.
It's an accelerated model
of how dogs might have been
domesticated from wolves.
In order to understand the
role that genetics plays
in the taming process,
the scientists also bred a group
of foxes to be more aggressive.
(foxes yipping)
(speaking Russian )
(translated): It
just bit my hand.
I didn't even open the cage.
I just put my hand out
and it managed to bite
me through the bars.
This isn't a fox,
it's a dragon.
(fox shrieking)
NARRATOR: This experiment
allows researchers
to make unique comparisons
between tame and
aggressive foxes.
(translated): We did
an experiment with
cross-fostering,
where we gave aggressive cubs
to tame mothers and vice versa.
We found out that the mother's
behavior does not influence
that of the cub.
This cub was brought
up by a tame mother.
NARRATOR: The results are clear.
The difference between
tame and aggressive foxes
is almost entirely genetic.
We even took the experiment
one stage further
and transplanted embryos
from aggressive mothers
into tame mothers, but the
results were the same.
It proved that you can't change
the gene of aggressiveness
and it will be
kept and preserved
for the next generation.
NARRATOR: Geneticists
have already located
several regions on the fox
genome responsible for tameness.
They're now taking blood samples
from tame and aggressive foxes
in an attempt to pinpoint
the specific genes.
Dr. Anna Kukekova,
the scientist leading
this research team,
makes the 5,000-mile journey
to Siberia to study the foxes.
KUKEKOVA: Behavior is complex.
We're pretty sure there
will be not a single gene,
definitely the
orchestra of genes,
which is responsible
for this behavior.
NARRATOR: One fascinating result
to come out of this experiment
is the fact that tamer foxes
are producing less adrenaline.
With lower adrenaline levels,
the foxes experience less
fear and are less aggressive.
He is like a doggy, you know,
like the puppy who's very happy
when somebody picks
him up from the floor.
(fox panting excitedly )
It's unbelievable how they
trust, how they trust people
and I just really
admire these animals.
TRUT: So within 50 years
of our intensive
selection process,
this fire-breathing dragon has
turned into a human friend.
If foxes were brought up
in a domestic environment,
interacting with other
animals and humans,
they would make fantastic pets.
They are as independent as cats
but at the same time as
devoted as any dog could be.
NARRATOR: One surprising
result of this experiment
is that as the foxes'
behavior changes,
so does their
physical appearance.
Just a few generations
into the experiment,
scientists noticed a
curious phenomenon.
The normal pattern and
silver color of the coat
changed dramatically in
some of the tame foxes.
Their tails often became
curly instead of straight.
Some young foxes kept
their floppy ears
for much longer than usual,
and their limbs and tails
generally became shorter
than their wild counterparts'.
In effect, the
tame silver foxes
were beginning to
look more like dogs.
BRIAN HARE: What
this shows is that when you
select against aggression,
you get almost all the same
suite of changes that you see
when you compare dogs to wolves.
NARRATOR: Evolutionary
anthropologist Brian Hare
is visiting the breeding
program in Siberia.
He believes once you
select for tameness,
changes in appearance
will naturally follow.
HARE: I think the surprise when
thinking about dog origins
is that there are so many ways
that dogs are
different from wolves,
so is it that you had to select
for each of these
traits individually?
Well, the answer from
the fox work is no.
If you just select
for behavior,
a lot of the morphological
and physiological changes
that we see between
wolves and dogs,
they just get dragged along.
You end up with this crazy
variance, you know--
floppy ears, curly tails... you
know, all these other things
that are really
cute to talk about
so you get a lot
of stuff for free
when you select
against aggression.
NARRATOR: For Hare, this wide
variety of physical traits
reveals something fundamental
about domestication.
HARE: When you're selecting
against aggression,
what you're doing
is you're favoring
juvenile traits.
Juveniles and infants show much
less aggression than adults,
and so basically you've
frozen development
at a much earlier stage,
and so you have an animal as an
adult that looks and behaves
much more like a juvenile.
It's amazing that you get
all this variance that's
hidden under the surface.
It starts to express itself,
and then, of course, later
people can directly decide,
''I really like the
one with the curly tail
''and I'm going to
take two of them
and I'm going to
put them together.''
And then you can end up having
dogs that sort of shift
in ways that people
want them to go.
NARRATOR: In the past
few hundred years,
we've taken dogs'
infantile features
and emphasized them even further
through selective breeding.
We've created hundreds
of breeds to fulfill
different roles,
but some of them have been
bred purely for their looks.
MORTEN KRINGLEBACH: I
think this kind of breeding
really tells us a lot about
what kind of people we are,
what it is that we
like about dogs.
How would you describe Nelly?
One word.
Uh,
Cute.
GIRL: Cute, adorable
and funny.
I just look at her
and I... I just smile.
Particularly when
she's sleeping.
She's very, very cute.
NARRATOR: We all know
we find them cute,
but what is it exactly
that makes us respond
to dogs so powerfully?
Psychiatrist Morten
Kringlebach has a theory
as to why the way dogs look has
such a profound impact on us.
The need to nurture I think is
something that is so deep in us
that we find it very
difficult to resist.
Dogs, puppies have very
infant-like features,
and maybe that's
one of the reasons
why we think they
are, you know, so cute
is that they remind
us of the infants
that we are, so to speak,
programmed to like.
There's something about the way
that the facial
features are organized
that makes us want
to care for them,
and it's about having
a large forehead,
it's about having
large eyes, big ears,
and there's something about that
that almost unconsciously
we cannot help ourselves
but actually like.
How are you feeling in there?
WOMAN: Good.
We're just going to
go one more scan.
NARRATOR: Dr.
Kringlebach is exploring
how strongly we respond to
these infantile features.
He uses an extremely powerful
machine called a MEG scanner
that allows him to
measure in real time
the brain's response to pictures
of baby and adult faces.
KRINGLEBACH: What we
found was that within
a seventh of a second,
there was activity in the
frontal part of the brain,
just over the eyebrows, in
the orbitofrontal cortex,
that was present when you were
looking at the infant faces
but not when you were
looking at the adult faces.
This part of the brain
is very much involved
in emotional responses,
and so what we think we may
have stumbled across here
is really in many ways
the brain equivalent
of the parental instinct.
There's almost like a
wired-in automatic reaction.
Just as with the infant, when
you are looking at dogs,
you find it very hard to
control your emotions.
You find it very hard not
to get that need to nurture.
Wow, look at that--
what a nice belly.
Mushu, mushu...
hey (laughing).
(in baby-talk voice): Oh, Boo,
you're so cute, yes, you are.
Oh, yes...
NARRATOR: But when we treat
dogs as if they were children,
do we sometimes allow them
to replace our children?
They are essentially moving our
focus away from having children
on to having pets.
ROWLEY-CONWY: I think
we can think of little
puppies brought home
as parasites.
They don't do anything useful.
They're not perceived
as a food source.
as a guard dog.
They are simply
brought home for fun.
The cuckoo is perhaps
quite a good analogy,
because the baby
cuckoo, of course,
being planted in
somebody else's nest,
prompts mother bird to
look after baby cuckoo,
even though there's nothing in
it for the mother bird at all.
KRINGLEBACH: I think
it's safe to say
that dogs have evolutionarily
been very successful.
If you compare them to wolves,
you will see that wolves are
now an endangered species,
while dogs, of course,
are all around the world.
NARRATOR: Whether they
are viewed as parasites
or beloved companions,
no one can deny the
evolutionary success
of the domesticated dog.
In fact, there are over
400 million worldwide.
And humans have created over 400
genetically distinct breeds.
Research on dogs is heading
in exciting new directions.
Geneticists have already mapped
the genome of one breed--
the boxer.
Studying this genome,
scientists now realize
that it offers
tremendous promise in
curing human disease.
Dr. Elinor Karlsson,
of the Broad Institute,
was part of the team that mapped
the boxer genome in 2005.
KARLSSON: If you looked in,
you know, a
population of humans,
you'd have quite a lot of
genetic variation across them.
People would be quite
different from one another.
But within a breed, dogs are
very similar to each other.
NARRATOR: Dr. Karlsson believes
that she can use that similarity
to understand the
genetics of human disease.
KARLSSON: I think there's
hundreds of diseases
that are in common
between dogs and humans.
There's diabetes, there's
various cardiac diseases,
there's epilepsy,
there's a lot of
different cancers--
bone cancers, breast
cancers, brain tumors.
NARRATOR: Today the
team is taking blood
samples from boxers,
which are susceptible
to a fatal heart disease
called cardiomyopathy.
The DNA in their blood
could hold vital clues
to the causes of the disease.
KARLSSON: Once we had
the dog genome sequenced,
we could design a gene chip
which would allow us to compare
all of our sick dogs
and our healthy dogs
and find the genes that
are causing diseases.
NARRATOR: Using a genotyping
machine, Dr. Karlsson
simultaneously analyzes
thousands of regions of DNA
from boxers with and
without this disease.
KARLSSON: So what you see
when you compare the sick
dogs to the healthy dogs
and go across the genome from
chromosome 1 to chromosome 2
and across, is that most of
the points are right near zero
and there's not a
lot of differences
between the healthy
dogs and the sick dogs
until you get to chromosome 1
7 and there, all of a sudden,
you have a huge
number of differences,
and this is really exciting
because this means that this is
the region of the genome
that holds the gene that's
causing our disease.
NARRATOR: Now, with the
mutation's identity known,
the team is able to locate the
corresponding gene in humans.
It's accelerated a process
that, without dogs,
could have taken decades.
KARLSSON: I think that there's
probably a lot of diseases
that are so
complicated in humans,
that dogs basically give us
a huge head start on that.
We can really say that dogs
are good for our health.
NARRATOR: For a pet that
has been around so long,
dog research is a surprisingly
new area of science.
Experiments have shown what dog
owners have always suspected--
after thousands of years
of living together,
dogs are attuned to us
like no other animal.
It's a very important part of
life to actually know a dog
and especially a dog that
adores you like this.
It's got to be
good for your self.
It's kind of impossible
to have a bad day
when you're coming home
to a wet nose and a
waggy tail, I think.
I can't imagine
life without her.
WOMAN: It's quite strange.
We weren't lacking anything
before we had him,
and yet now we would feel we
were lacking if he wasn't here.
They just enrich your life;
they are the best thing ever.
They keep you young.
NARRATOR: New research has
taken our understanding
of how dogs evolved
to a whole new level,
getting us closer to
what it means to be tame.
MILLS: While we can
have good relationships
with a wide
variety of animals,
historically our relationship
with dogs seems to have been
the longest one with
any domestic animal.
LARSON: I think one reason
that there are almost seven
billion people on earth
is in large part due to the
role that dogs have played
in our evolutionary existence.
Personally I don't think
it's any coincidence
that the dog is referred
to as man's best friend.
the exploration continues
on NOVA's website,
where you can stream
Dogs Decoded online.
Hear how dogs compare
to other smart animals
and vote for your favorite.
And test your
knowledge of dog breeds
and where in the
world they come from.
Expand your view of
nature with interactives,
expert interviews, teacher
resources and more.
Follow NOVA on
Facebook and twitter.
And find us online at pbs.org.
Major funding for NoVA is
provided by the following...
ExxonMobil, taking on
the world's toughest
energy challenges.
And by:
And...
And by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Captioned by Media Access
Group at WGBH access.wgbh.org